### Section 6.7 Physical Applications
p458: You may justset up the integrals and not evaluate. Show a diagram with a coordinate system and representative slice.  Show a Riemann Sum on one problem. 6, 38, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 58, 61

6\. Why must integration be used to find the total force on the face of a dam?
>**Solution**
Water of different depth has different force.

38–41\. **Force on dams** The following figures show the shape and dimensions of small dams. Assuming the water level is at the top of the dam, find the total force on the face of the dam.
38\. Graph (38).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 40\\
F &= \int_0^{10} \rho g (10-y) w(y)dy\\
&= 40\rho g \int_0^{10} (10-y)dy
= 1.96 \times 10^7 N
}
$$

40\. Graph (40).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 2\sqrt{20^2 - y^2}\\
F &= \int_{-20}^0 \rho g (0-y) w(y) dy\\
&= -2\rho g \int_{-20}^0 y\sqrt{20^2 - y^2} dy
= 5.2267 \times 10^7 N
}
$$

41\. Graph (41).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= \frac{2}{3}y\\
F &= \int_0^{30} \rho g (30-y) w(y) dy\\
&= \frac{2}{3}\rho g \int_0^{30} y(30-y) dy
= 2.94 \times 10^7 N
}
$$

<!-- pagebreak -->
42\. **Parabolic dam** The lower edge of a dam is defined by the parabola $y = x^2/16$ (see figure). Use a coordinate system with $y = 0$ at the bottom of the dam to determine the total force on the dam. Lengths are measured in meters. Assume the water level is at the top of the dam. Graph (42).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 8\sqrt y \\
F &= \int_0^{25} \rho g (25-y) w(y) dy\\
&= 8 \rho g \int_0^{25} \sqrt y(25-y) dy
= 6.53 \times 10^7 N
}
$$

43\. **Force on a building** A large building shaped like a box is $50 m$ high with a face that is $80 m$ wide. A strong wind blows directly at the face of the building, exerting a pressure of $150 N/m^2$ at the ground and increasing with height according to $P(y) = 150 + 2y$, where $y$ is the height above the ground. Calculate the total force on the building, which is a measure of the resistance that must be included in the design of the building. Graph (43).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
F &= \int_0^{50} P(y) \cdot 80 dy\\
&= 80 \int_0^{50} (2y+150)dy
= 8 \times 10^5
}
$$

44–46\. **Force on a window** A diving pool that is $4 m$ deep and full of water has a viewing window on one of its vertical walls. Find the force on the following windows.
44\. The window is a square, $0.5 m$ on a side, with the lower edge of the window on the bottom of the pool.
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 0.5 \\
F &= \int_0^{0.5} \rho g (4-y) w(y) dy\\
&= 0.5 \rho g \int_0^{0.5} (4-y) dy
= 9187.5 N
}
$$

45\. The window is a square, $0.5 m$ on a side, with the lower edge of the window 1 m from the bottom of the pool.
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 0.5 \\
F &= \int_1^{1.5} \rho g (4-y) w(y) dy\\
&= 0.5 \rho g \int_1^{1.5} (4-y) dy
= 6737.5 N
}
$$

<!-- pagebreak -->
46\. The window is a circle, with a radius of $0.5 m$, tangent to the bottom of the pool.
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 2\sqrt{0.5^2 - (y-0.5)^2} \\
F &= \int_0^1 \rho g (4-y) w(y) dy\\
&= 2 \rho g \int_0^1 (4-y) \sqrt{0.5^2 - (y-0.5)^2} dy
\approx 26939.2 N
}
$$

58\. **Orientation and force** A plate shaped like an equilateral triangle $1 m$ on a side is placed on a vertical wall 1 m below the surface of a pool filled with water. On which plate in the figure is the force greater? Try to anticipate the answer and then compute the force on each plate. Graph (58).
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
\text{case #1:}\\
w_1(y) &= 1-\frac{2y}{\sqrt 3}, h_1= 1 + \frac{\sqrt 3}{2}\\
F_1 &= \int_0^{\frac{\sqrt 3}{2}} \rho g (h_1-y)w_1(y) dy\\
&= \rho g \int_0^{\frac{\sqrt 3}{2}} (1 + \frac{\sqrt 3}{2}-y)(1-\frac{2y}{\sqrt 3}) dy
\approx 6693.5 N\\
\text{case #2:}\\
w_2(y) &= \frac{2y}{\sqrt 3}, h_2= 1 + \frac{\sqrt 3}{2}\\
F_2 &= \int_0^{\frac{\sqrt 3}{2}} \rho g (h_2-y) w_2(y)) dy\\
&= \rho g \int_0^{\frac{\sqrt 3}{2}} (1 + \frac{\sqrt 3}{2}-y) \frac{2y}{\sqrt 3} dy
\approx 5468.5 N\\
\text{Result: } &F_1 \gt F_2
}
$$

<!-- pagebreak -->
61\. **Critical depth** A large tank has a plastic window on one wall that is designed to withstand a force of $90,000 N$. The square window is $2 m$ on a side, and its lower edge is 1 m from the bottom of the tank.
a. If the tank is filled to a depth of 4 m, will the window withstand the resulting force?
b. What is the maximum depth to which the tank can be filled without the window failing?
>**Solution**
$$
\eqalign{
w(y) &= 2\\
F &= \int_1^3 2\rho g (h-y)dy \\
&= 2\rho g (hy-\frac{y^2}{2}) \mid_1^3\\
}
$$
a. When $h = 4, F = 78400 N$, the windown can withstand the force.
b. To find the maximum depth, we need to solve for $h$.
$$
\eqalign{
2\rho g (hy-\frac{y^2}{2}) \mid_1^3 &= 90000 \\
4\times 9800 (h-2) &= 90000\\
h &\approx 4.30m
}
$$
